📝 how to configure a new study (#109)
kids-first/kf-lib-data-ingest: docs/source/tutorial/extract.rst

We will step through how to write an extract configuration file for one of the
source data files and then you should be able to write the configs for the rest
of them.

Here's a example source data file:
----------------------------------

.. csv-table:: family_and_phenotype.tsv
    :header: "participant", "mother", "father", "gender", "consent", "age in hours", "CLEFT_EGO", "CLEFT_ID", "age in hours", "EXTRA_EARDRUM"

    "PID001", "2", "3", "F", "1", "4", "TRUE", "FALSE", "4", "FALSE"
    "PID002", "", "", "", "1", "435", "TRUE", "FALSE", "435", "FALSE"
    "PID003", "", "", "", "1", "34", "TRUE", "FALSE", "34", "FALSE"
    "PID004", "5", "6", "M", "2", "4", "TRUE", "TRUE", "4", "FALSE"
    "PID005", "", "", "", "1", "345", "TRUE", "TRUE", "34", "FALSE"
    "PID006", "", "", "", "2", "34", "TRUE", "TRUE", "43545", "FALSE"
    "PID007", "8", "9", "M", "1", "34", "TRUE", "FALSE", "5", "TRUE"
    "PID008", "", "", "", "1", "43545", "TRUE", "TRUE", "52", "TRUE"
    "PID009", "", "", "", "1", "5", "FALSE", "TRUE", "25", "TRUE"

In order to ingest this data into the Kids First ecosystem, we need to:
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

> * Convert the column headers into something standardized that the toolchain can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Convert the column headers into a standardized set of values that the toolchain can understand. The values are defined in the Standard Concept Schema located  in kf_lib_data_ingest.etl.transform.standard_model.concept_schema.CONCEPT
```

Author: 👌

  events
* Convert the TRUE and FALSE strings into standardized observation codes

The following extract configuration file accomplishes all of those needs
------------------------------------------------------------------------

(We'll explain how each piece works after showing the whole thing)

.. code-block:: python

    from kf_lib_data_ingest.common import constants
    from kf_lib_data_ingest.etl.extract.operations import *
    from kf_lib_data_ingest.etl.transform.standard_model.concept_schema import (
        CONCEPT
    )

    source_data_url = 'file://path/to/family_and_phenotype.tsv'

    source_data_loading_parameters = {}

    def observed_yes_no(x):
        if isinstance(x, str):
            x = x.lower()
        if x in {"true", "yes", 1}:
            return constants.PHENOTYPE.OBSERVED.YES
        elif x in {"false", "no", 0}:
            return constants.PHENOTYPE.OBSERVED.NO
        elif x in {"", None}:
            return None

    operations = [
        value_map(
            in_col="participant",
            m={
                r"PID(\d+)": lambda x: int(x),  # strip PID and 0-padding
            },
            out_col=CONCEPT.PARTICIPANT.ID
        ),

>         value_map(

Reviewer: Lets change this to use `keep_map`

Author: 👌

            in_col="mother",
            m=lambda x: x,
            out_col=CONCEPT.PARTICIPANT.MOTHER_ID
        ),

>         value_map(

Reviewer: Lets change this to use `keep_map`

Author: 👌

            ),
            melt_map(
                var_name=CONCEPT.PHENOTYPE.NAME,
                map_for_vars={
                    "EXTRA_EARDRUM": "Extra eardrum"
                },
                value_name=CONCEPT.PHENOTYPE.OBSERVED,
                map_for_values=observed_yes_no
            )
        ]
    ]

Now let's break down how it works...

Imports!
--------

.. code-block:: python

    from kf_lib_data_ingest.common import constants
    from kf_lib_data_ingest.etl.extract.operations import *
    from kf_lib_data_ingest.etl.transform.standard_model.concept_schema import (
        CONCEPT
    )

It's a Python module! Cool! That lets us do all kinds of neat stuff like
import predefined constants and functions.

Fetching the data
-----------------

.. code-block:: python

    source_data_url = 'file://path/to/family_and_phenotype.tsv'

The first thing that the extractor does for every config file is fetch the
related source data. This specifies where the file lives so that the code can
fetch it.

Supported protocol prefixes are:
``file://``, ``s3://``, ``http://``, ``https://``

Loading the data
----------------

.. code-block:: python

>     source_data_loading_parameters = {}

Author: Hmm...yeah probably.

>     source_data_loading_parameters = {}

Author: 👌

This file contains tab-separated values with a simple layout where the first
row is the column headers, so it gets loaded correctly by default. With more
complex files we'd have to define how to load the data. Those arguments would
go here. For more information on custom loading read <TODO>.

Extract operations
------------------

The operations list
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: python

    operations = [
        ...
    ]

> This is a list of special functions that implement all of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a list of special functions that the extract stage will execute to select subsets of source data, clean, and map the data to the desired attributes and values. The most useful functions are already written for you. You just have to invoke them appropriately.  
```

Author: 👌

convert/unify/reshape/standardize stuff described earlier. The most useful
functions are already written for you. You just have to invoke them
appropriately.

For more information about extract operation functions, read <TODO>.

A value map operation with functional replacements
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: python

    value_map(
        in_col="participant",
        m={
            r"PID(\d+)": lambda x: int(x),  # strip PID and 0-padding
        },
        out_col=CONCEPT.PARTICIPANT.ID
    )

> This says "Use the ``participant`` column as input (in_col=), replace

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This says "Use the ``participant`` column as input (`in_col=`), replace
```

everything that matches the regular expression pattern ``^PID(\d+)$`` with just
the captured part and remove the zero padding by running the captured part
through the function ``lambda x: int(x)`` (m={...}), and then output the result
to a ``CONCEPT.PARTICIPANT.ID`` column (out_col=)."

The resulting intermediate output will look like:

.. csv-table::

>     :header: "index", "<CONCEPT.PARTICIPANT.ID>"

Reviewer: Why are all of the mapped concept col names enclosed in <>?

Author: . vs | stylistic decision

Reviewer: Oh I didn't even notice the delimiter 😄 , I was just talking about the <>

Author: I used < because I used . and not |

Author: it's arbitrary

    "0", "1"
    "1", "2"
    "2", "3"
    "3", "4"
    "4", "5"
    "5", "6"
    "6", "7"
    "7", "8"
    "8", "9"

``lambda x: int(x)`` could be replaced by just ``int``, since the two
expressions are functionally equivalent (both single-argument functions that
effectively strip the leading zeros).

We could also have kept these IDs as they were and instead converted the
mother/father IDs, but, in the absence of an overriding directive such as input
from the investigators about their preferences, it doesn't really make a
difference which way we choose.

> A value map operation with variable replacements

Reviewer: I think we need a brief section before this next value map that describes the concept schema

```
Ok before moving on to the next operation, let's pause for a second and understand what CONCEPT.PARTICIPANT.ID is and where it came from ..

Understanding the Standard Concept Schema
-----------------------------------------------
At the most basic level, the Standard Concept Schema is just a set of standardized attributes used by the ingest library. Contextually, these attributes represent a standard set of things or concepts in the world and a standard set of attributes for those things or concepts. The ideas is to transform the source data to this standardized intermediate set of values and then transform from the intermediate values to a set of target values defined by the target database or service.

So for example the for a column named `Body site` in our source data, we need to tell the ingest library what this means by specifying which concept and attribute this column name translates to. In this case, the column would probably map to `CONCEPT.BIOSPECIMEN.ANATOMICAL_SITE`. 

In the case of our value map above, we are mapping the `participant` column to `CONCEPT.PARTICIPANT.ID`, something that means the unique identifier for the standard concept of participant.  
```

Reviewer: Actually, should we have a separate section outside of extract for the standard concept schema?

Author: somewhere else

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: python

    value_map(
        in_col="gender",
        m={
            "F": constants.GENDER.FEMALE,
            "M": constants.GENDER.MALE
        },
        out_col=CONCEPT.PARTICIPANT.GENDER
    )

> This says "Use the ``gender`` column as input (in_col=), replace everything

Reviewer: Can we mention something about the fact that standard codes are defined in the constants module and you should always try to use them if possible?

Author: 👌
